
# Quest - A tool for testing C compilers

This is Quest, a tool that generates C code for testing C compilers. A test
is run by compiling it with the compiler under test and subsequently
executing the binary that the compiler produced. A compiler bug manifests
itself by an assertion failure during the execution of the binary.

The code generated tests one specific part of a C compiler: how it
implements passing values to a function by function call and returning a
value from it using the return statement. Stated simpler, the generated
code by Quests checks that a value passed to a function is indeed received
unaltered from the caller and likewise when a valuereturned to the caller.
Conceptually, the code generated by Quest looks like this:

    static int   i = 1;
    static char  c = 'c'; 
    static float r = 3.14; 

    static float f(int ii, char cc)
    {
        assert(ii == i);
        assert(cc == c);
        return r;
    }

    static void test(void)
    {
        float rr;
        rr = f(i ,c);
        assert(rr == r); 
    }

    int main(int argc, char **argv)
    {
        test();
    }

By compiling and runnung the code with a C compiler we can test that values
are passed and returned to and from a function as expected:

    $ quest > testcase.c
    $ gcc -o testcase testcase.c
    $ ./testcase

If the compiler fails to generate correct code, executing the code will
lead to an assertion failure that would highlight the problem. Quest
generates tests in a random yet controlled way. Generating a test case,
compiling and running it can be done in a loop until a bug is found.

# The Issue

Why is compiling function calls even an issue? What looks simple on the
surface of C source code is quite complicated inside a compiler. How
values are supposed to be passed between functions is governed by a calling
convention. Such a convention specifies how values are passed in registers
and on the stack using a specific alignment. C calling conventions in
particular are complicted when structured values are passed, like
structures, or var args.  As a consequence, even mature compilers exhibit
bugs and Quest helps to find them. The beauty is that we don't have to know
the details of a calling convention in order to test it: generating test
cases and executing them is enough. 

Directory doc/ contains a [paper](doc/lindig-aadebug-2005.pdf) whith more
details:

    Christian Lindig. Random  Testing of C Calling Conventions. In
    Jong Deok Choi and Raimondas Lencevicius, editors, Sixth
    Internation Symposium on  Automated and Analysis-Driven
    Debugging", ACM Press, Monterey, CA,  USA, September 2005. 

Directory [bugs](bugs) contains a few compiler bugs that were uncovered
with Quest in the past. This provides also examples for code generated
by Quest.

# Installation

Quest is implemened in OCaml as a literate program. It should build on Unix
systems without a problem and does not depend on libraries outside the
OCaml standard libraries and its tools.

    $ make PREFIX=$HOME

# Quick Start

To be written. See [doc/quest.pod](doc/quest.pod) for now.

# Documentation

* The manual page quest.pod in doc/ explains Quest in detail. 

* If you have a Quest binary you can view the manual page also with
    
    quest -man

  which emits it to stdout. A short summary of options is available
  with:
   
    quest -help

* The Lua 2.5 reference manual in doc/ introduces the Lua scripting
  language. It is only required to define new generators beyond the
  existing ones.

# Quest Features

* Quest pretty prints C code to keep it readable.

* Quest can split test cases into two files such that they may be
  compiled by different compilers to check their interoperability.

* Neither Quest itself, nor the generated code requires any special
  run-time libraries or configuration files. 

* Quest is developed on Mach OS X but contains no
  system-specific source code. However, the build process needs to be
  adapted for other systems.

* Quest is controlled by an embedded Lua interpreter. This makes it easy to
  tailor the generation of test cases.

# Author

Christian Lindig <lindig@gmail.com>. 
Please report bugs on GitHub https://github.com/lindig/quest

